# Example Data Sources

This README file records the source of all example data present in STExplorer's `extdata` folder and used in the vignettes when loading data from source and not as an .rda/.rds R object. For the latter, have a look at the `data` folder in STExplorer's source code.

## Visium datasets
These datasets are generated by the Visium V2 platform

### Lung 
Folder structure containing the lung example data:

```
extdata/visium/lung
├── Fibrotic
│	└── outs
│	    ├── filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5
│	    └── spatial
│	        ├── scalefactors_json.json
│	        ├── tissue_lowres_image.png
│	        └── tissue_positions_list.csv
├── Healthy
│	└── outs
│	    ├── filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5
│	    └── spatial
│	        ├── scalefactors_json.json
│	        ├── tissue_lowres_image.png
│	        └── tissue_positions_list.csv
├── fibrotic_sample_annotation.csv
├── fibrotic_spot_cell_abundances_5pc.csv
├── habermann_cell_type_groups.csv
├── healthy_sample_annotation.csv
└── healthy_spot_cell_abundances_5pc.csv
```

The lung dataset comes from the Franzen *et. al.*, 2024, Nat. Genet. publication (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-024-01819-2). The **Healthy** and **Fibrotic** samples here are samples **V10T31-015-A1** and **V19S23-092-D1** respectively from the publication.

The `*healthy/fibrotic*_sample_annotation.csv` contains the spot annotation for each sample as assigned by the original authors and downloaded from https://github.com/lfranzen/spatial-lung-fibrosis/tree/master/data/misc.

The `habermann_cell_type_groups.csv` is also downloaded from https://github.com/lfranzen/spatial-lung-fibrosis/tree/master/data/misc and contains the cell type groups and subgroups as identified by the original authors using the Habermann *et. al.*, 2020, Sci. Adv. single cell data to deconvolut their visium data using the `cell2location` R package.

The `*healthy/fibrotic*_spot_cell_abundances_5pc.csv` contains the absolute cell type densities in each spot, as calculated by the original authors using the `cell2location` R package and the Habermann *et. al.*, 2020, Sci. Adv. single cell data. These files were downloaded from https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/studies/S-BSST1410. However, instead of `healthy/fibrotic` the have the corresponding sample IDs as stated above.

### Prostate 
Folder structure containing the prostate example data:

```
extdata/visium/prostate
├── H2_5
│	└── outs
│	    ├── filtered_feature_bc_matrix.h5
│	    └── spatial
│	        ├── scalefactors_json.json
│	        ├── tissue_lowres_image.png
│	        └── tissue_positions_list.csv
└── H2_5_Final_Consensus_Annotations.csv
```
The prostate dataset comes from the Erickson *et. al.*, 2022, Nature publication (https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05023-2). The **H2_5** sample is only one of the available samples from the above publication, it originates from the individual named *Patient 1* by the original authors and we selected it because it includes cancerous and adjascent *healthy* areas.

The data were downloaded from https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/svw96g68dv/1 (look under `Count_matrices/Patient 1/Visium_with_annotation/H2_5`). In the same folder you can find the `H2_5_Final_Consensus_Annotations.csv` containing the final histopathological annotations.


